---
layout: post
title:  "The first mass-produced book to deviate from a rectilinear format"
author: alex
categories: [ tutorial ]
image: assets/images/17.jpg
tags: [featured]
---
John Harbaugh, 12 year head coach of the Baltimore Ravens, made his thoughts known on Thursday regarding the NFL’s COVID-19 guidelines for returning to preseason training during an interview with local sports station 105.7 The Fan.  The Baltimore head coach mentions early in the conversation that due to COVID-19 he and his staff “haven’t seen our players, in person, at all” which has pushed them to utilize as much virtual communication as they can. 
When asked about what steps the organization plans to take moving forward in regards to using their training facilities amidst social distancing guidelines, Coach Harbaugh claimed he has “seen the memos on that, and to be quite honest with you it’s impossible what they’re asking us to do, humanly impossible”.  He made a point to mention that nobody knows what the actual reintegration of training will look like, “not even the experts know” how this will shake out over the next few months.
The current protocol requirements the NFL is demanding from teams includes social distancing in the locker room, meetings, weight rooms, and even cafeterias.  Harbaugh made it very clear he is not confident maintaining those standards will be possible in a football training environment.  	Harbaugh goes on to list examples of problem areas with this protocol stating “I’m pretty sure the huddle is not going to be six feet spaced.   Are the guys going to shower one at time all day?  Are guys going to lift weights one at a time all day?” he continues letting the audience know “These are things the league and the [players' association] needs to get a handle on and needs to get agreed with some common sense so we can operate in a 13-hour day in training camp that they're giving us and get our work done. That's the one thing; you can tell by my voice, I'm a little frustrated with what I'm hearing there. And I think they need to get that pinned down a little better”.  Listeners could sense Harbaugh’s growing irritation with the restrictions set in place as he expresses thinking “good people, smart people are involved in this, but the way I'm reading these memos right now, you throw your hands up and you go, 'What the heck? There's no way this can be right.”  Coach still says the team is planning on doing everything they can to maintain safety despite the complications it may lead to with a proper training schedule, “we’re going to space, we’re going to have masks, but, you know, it's a communication sport. We have to be able to communicate with each other in person. We have to practice."
Ultimately John Harbaugh wants to have procedures put into place that are fair for all 32 teams in the league.   He worries because "as a coach, you don't want to hear that you're limiting your operations as far as preparing your team and then you hear 10 other teams aren't paying attention to the rules and then there's no consequence for that," which then can lead to “[Other teams having] an advantage on you. That's what I don't want to see. I just think it needs to be fair and it needs to be reasonable, and I think they'll find a way to do that." 
As it stands training camps are slated to start in late July with the first preseason game, Dallas vs Pittsburgh in the Hall of Fame game, to take place on August 6th.  The Super Bowl champion coach anticipates that guidelines will be “more realistic and practical" by that that time.
	
